# **Data from: Over 10,000 Pre-Columbian earthworks are still hidden throughout Amazonia** <br />
This set data and of R computer codes were used to create the predictive model, figures and develop analysis on the manuscript "Over 10,000 Pre-Columbian earthworks are still hidden throughout Amazonia" published on Science research article (DOI: ...). Please read the materials and methods sections on the manuscript supplemental material, as well as the data in the "dataset" folder, to ensure reproducibility.

## **Abstract** <br />
Pre-Columbian societies are known to have occupied the entire Amazon basin for over 12,000 years, but the scale of their impact on Amazonian forests remains uncertain. Using Light Detection and Ranging information from across the basin, we report the discovery of 24 previously undetected pre-Columbian earthworks beneath the forest canopy. Modeled distribution and abundance of large-scale archeological sites across Amazonia suggest that 10,272–23,640 sites remain to be discovered and that most will be found in the southwest. We also identified 53 domesticated tree species significantly associated with earthwork occurrence, suggesting past forest management practices. Closed-canopy forests across Amazonia are likely to contain thousands of new archaeological sites around which pre-Columbian societies actively modified forests, a discovery that opens new opportunities for understanding the magnitude of ancient human influence on Amazonia.

## **Earthwork Predictive Model** <br />
The Inhomogeneous Poisson Process (IPP) <a href="https://github.com/Vperipato/ade2541/blob/main/ade2541_PredictiveModel.r" target="_blank">model</a> fit was performed using the ‘fit_bayesPO’ function of the ‘<a href="https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=bayesPO" target="_blank">bayesPO</a>’ library in R version 4.0.2. The model was developed by the author of the package <a href="https://github.com/GuidoAMoreira" target="_blank">Guido Alberti Moreira</a>.

### Figures
Figures created from R computer codes presented on the Main text are inside the "<a href="https://github.com/Vperipato/ade2541/tree/main/MainText_figures" target="_blank">MainText_figures</a>" folder, and Supplementary material figures are inside the "<a href="https://github.com/Vperipato/ade2541/tree/main/SuppMaterial_figures" target="_blank">SuppMaterial_figures</a>" folder. Please utilize the instructions in the supplementary material in conjunction with the data in the "database" folder to ensure reproducibility.
